Welcome everyone to.
Part two of our lecture series on the group by statement.
Let's go ahead and jump toward database and work through some group by examples so we can actually build
in some practice into creating a query that would work with a GROUP BY clause.
I'm going to head straight to P.G. Ataman All right here I am at P.G. admin.
First one I'm going to do is explore the payment table.
I'm going to do this just by saying select everything from the payment table.
Typically wouldn't do this but since we have a small table here it's not so bad to just explore it.
It looks like the payment table we have a payment I.D..
So it's a unique identifier preach payment.
Then we have a customer I.D. So notice here It's categorical.
So even though this is a number this is essentially the actual customer I.D. So this customer three
for one and you can see he's visited multiple times and rented out multiple things and he had different
interactions with different staff.
So we also have a staff I.T. which is also a numeric but we can treat it as a class since it's a kind
of a category here we can think of this almost as the name of the staff person in the same way we can
think of customer ideas.
Here we have kind of a name identifier per customer.
Then we have the rental I.D. here.
Essentially what movie was actually rented.
Later on we'll learn how to join this rental I.D. column to the actual film column to see what actual
film is being rented.
And then we have the amount on that particular transaction as well as the payment date so let's do the
simplest group by possible which is to group together the actual customer I.D..
So what does that actually mean.
Well I could say select customer I.D. from payment group by customer I.D. So if I run this this is actually
essentially the same thing as selecting the distinct customer I.D..
This is a bit of a roundabout way to go about it but if you think what we're doing here we're just kind
of aggregating all the customer I.D. together and we're not performing in the aggregate functions on
any other columns.
So we just get this list of customer I.D. And if I wanted to I could add an order by statement here
to order by that same column.
And essentially I just get the customer I.D. here that we have in the payment table in order.
So nothing too crazy here.
And this is not a typical use case for a group buying but it's the simplest group by possible of just
selecting the column and then grouping by it which is actually the same as essentially it's selecting
the distinct values of that column was probably more helpful is to do this in conjunction with an aggregate
function on another column.
Let's imagine I wanted to answer the question what customer is spending the most money in total.
Well what I could do is take the sum of the amount column in conjunction with grouping by customer I.D..
So if I run this I can now see the total sum that every customer spent.
And then if I wanted to actually order this I would say order by and I can't just say order by amount
I have to say order by the sum amount since that is truly what this column is.
It's not just the amount column.
It's a total sum of the amount column per customer I.D. and a lot of times that the word per really
helps beginners understand what the group buy is doing.
So I can read this as the total sum amount per customer I.D. And I'm going to run this and I can see
this is in order and we can change it from ascending to descending if we want with AFC or DSC and this
is a very typical cycle query that is using group buy to answer a real question what customer I.D. is
actually spending the most amount of money and we can do other things like actually count the number
of transactions they're having.
So I could do something like this instead of actually saying take the sum of the amounts actually just
count how many transactions are having.
So notice here the difference in the question some is asking for the total amount of dollars being transacted
count is just how many transactions are occurring.
So when I run this I can see the counts here with customer name I.D. 148 having 45 total transactions.
OK now well we can also do here is use group buy on multiple columns so we discuss this.
But let's go ahead and see it in practice.
First quickly show you the entire table again so we can get an idea of it.
So again we have that payment I.D. customer I.D. notice there's also a staff I.D..
So what I could start to explore is grouping by customer I.D. and then grouping by staff I.D. or grouping
by staff I.T. and then grouping by customer I.D..
So let's go ahead and show you an example of that.
I'm going to say select customer I.D. staff Ida and then some amount and I'm going to group by staff
I.D. and then
customer I.D. So if I just run this what's happening here is it's telling me the total amount spent
per staff per customer.
So that means customer number one spends sixty dollars ninety five cents with the staff I.D. person
number one and what I could do if I wanted to is order by the customer I.D..
So when I run this I can now essentially see how much each customer spent with each staff member.
So in this case it looks like customer 1 spent sixty dollars ninety five cents of staff I.D. number
one and then fifty three dollars ninety five cents with staff I.D. number two something to keep in mind
here is while the group by order does matter as far as how your grouping things together the actual
select statement that order it doesn't really matter.
So I could if I wanted to organize the results by staff I.D. first and then by customer I.D..
So if we just see those results I'll go in and remove the order by just so we can see those real results
here.
But here I'm essentially not changing any information.
So we still see staff I.D. customer I.D. and then the total sum per customer.
And then if you wanted to you could either order by staff I.D. run that and I can see all the ones here
and then we could do a sub ordering by customer I.D. and so I can see staff I.D. one and then his transactions
if one staff I.D. one is transactions of two et cetera.
Or I could order by customer I.D. run that.
And now notice I see customer I.D. ordered but it's ordered and centred here in the middle.
So keep that in mind.
All of these are essentially showing you the same information but it's up to you how you actually want
to display it.
So most often you're going to actually select things in the same order that you're grouping by in.
So keep that in mind.
And then ordering by it's up to you the pinning on what kind of question you're trying to answer.
So we could have also said order by some on the amount column run that and we get back these results
you can order by any of these three columns or multiple columns.
But the main thing to note here is that I can grouped by multiple columns.
The last thing I want to point out and we will learn about this in much more detail later is when you
do a group by on a date column.
So if we take a look at select everything from payment notice that we had a payment date which was a
time stamp because it's a time stamp and not just has the date information but the time as well.
So it has the hour the minutes the seconds et cetera.
So if we actually want to perform a group by a date we have to call a specialized date function to convert
the time stamp to a date and then we can actually group by that.
So what I'm going to show you is that function first we can say select date from payment dates and we
will learn a lot more about dealing with timestamps later on.
But if we just run this we can expand this column and notice here it's essentially just filtered out
the actual date it's removed that timestamp information which makes sense because we don't want to group
by every single transaction per minute.
We probably want to do is just group by day.
So I'm going to say select the date on the actual payment date timestamp which essentially just the
day from payment and then let's go ahead and group by date payment date.
If I run this this is essentially just returning back the distinct dates but maybe I want to figure
out how much is actually being processed each day.
So I could take the sum of the amount column run that as well and then maybe I want to order by the
actual some amount.
Column run that and I can see the days where we're having the least amount and total dollar transactions
or pending how I sort this by sort of in descending order I can see the dates that were having the most
in dollar transactions.
Again what the state function is doing is it's extracting just the day portion from that timestamp information
because if you just said group by payment date the main thing to keep mine is I don't want to just group
buy that payment date because it was a timestamp information down to the sub second which means I would
essentially almost have a unique category per payment which isn't terribly useful.
However we did have multiple payments on the same day which is why I'm using date to extract just the
actual year month and day information from payment date which then means I can group buy that.
All right.
So you've seen a couple of examples here already with using group buy.
What I want to do is give you a couple of challenge tasks and these challenge tasks are going to be
a bit harder than what you've encountered before because we are making a bit more of a leap in learning
about group by as far as what operations and queries we are now capable of.
So keep that in mind these challenges won't be as simple as the ones we saw before but hopefully they
give you a good run for your money.
All right I'll see you at the next lecture where we present the group by challenges.